You've probably heard a lot
about data science and big data.
And there's been a lot of
hype around these areas.
And so I think what that's done, is it's
sort of inflated expectations about what
a data science and
data can actually accomplish.
And I think overall that's
just been a net negative for
the field of data science and
for big data.
So I wanted to talk a little bit about
what is the way what are the questions you
can ask to separate data science
hype from data science hope and
so if you look at this sort of the hype
curve the traditional hype curve that
people talk about I think that we've
seen a lot about inflated expectations.
And we're sort of just now coming out
into this sort of productive plateau,
where people actually know
what to do with data.
They know how to data science.
So it's a perfect time to start,
you know, managing those teams.
And managing expectations in a way
that's really clear, and really focused.
So the first question you need to ask
yourself, is what problem have you solved
ever that was worth solving where you knew
all of the given information in advance?
Where you didn't have a surplus of
information and have to filter some of it
out, or you didn't have insufficient
information and have to go find some?
And so that's kind of the key.
That's at the heart of data science.
That's actually a quote from Dan Meyer who
was talking about mathematics education.
But it's also at the heart
of data science.
It's basically trying to decide what
information do you have, is it useful, and
then what information do you need and
can you get it?
So the first question is,
what is the question you are trying
to answer with the data?
So if someone comes to talk to
you about a big data project, or
a data science project, and
they start talking about the hottest new
cool technology they can use to
do distributed computing, and
analyze data with machine learning and
they throw a bunch of buzz words at you.
The very first question you should ask
is what is the question you're trying to
answer with data.
Because that really narrows
the question down and
it filters out a lot of the hype around
what tools and technologies people
are using which can often be very
interesting, fun to talk about.
I like to talk about them too but
they're not really gonna add
value to your organization.
The second question to ask is,
once you've identified what that question
is you're trying to answer with the data.
And this is the really hard one,
is, do you have the data to
actually answer that question?
So often the question that you wanna
answer and the data that you have to
answer it with are not actually
very compatible with each other.
And so the first question you have to
kinda have to ask yourself is can we get
the data in a shape, where we can actually
answer the question we want to answer?
And sometimes the answer is just no, in
which case, you kind of have to give up.
So, if you want to decide on whether
a project is hype or whether it's reality,
you need to decide, is the data the people
are trying to use actually relevant for
the question they are trying to answer and
then,
the third thing you need to answer is.
If you could answer the question
with the data you have,
suppose that you could perfectly answer,
you knew that you could do that,
the question is, could you even use
the answer that you've collected?
So this goes back to that idea from the
Netflix prize where there was a solution
to the problem of predicting which
videos people would like to watch.
And it was a very very good solution.
But it wasn't a solution that could be
implemented with the computing resources
that Netflix had in a way that was
sort of financially expedient.
Even though they could
answer the question,
even though they did have the right data,
even though they were answering a specific
question, they couldn't actually apply
the results of what they figured out.
So if you ask these three questions,
you can very quickly decipher whether
a data science project is about hype or
whether it's
about a real contribution that can
really move your organisation forward.